---
title: The Unfortunate over-hyping of Artificial Intelligence
description:
  AI has revolutionized the world in profound ways. But it's being portrayed
  unfairly and in the wrong light.
created: 02-26-2025
updated: 02-26-2025
image: "../../images/the-unfortunate-overhyping-of-ai.jpeg"
image_source: Generated using Bing Image Creator
author: naparajith
draft: false
---

{/* This website is only meant to showcase the work and and skills of the
author, on a professional level. It also has a blog, containing the author's
observations and opinions on various topics. The views expressed are the
author's own. Copyright (C) 2025 T L Naparajith

This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the terms of the GNU Affero General Public License Version 3 as published by the
Free Software Foundation.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY
WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the GNU Affero General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU Affero General Public License along
with this program. If not, see <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/agpl-3.0.txt>.

Contact me through electronic mail: <naparajith@duck.com> */}

import A from "@/components/A.astro";

Over the past few years, AI has made tremendous progress in innovation and
growth, with the industry adopting it at an unprecedented rate. The release of
ChatGPT 3.5 in 2023 marked a significant shift in how AI is perceived and used.
The world has not been the same since.

## The AI Boom

The rapid growth of AI has led to a race to build newer, better AI models that
can process larger inputs, provide results faster, and even reason and think on
their own. These models are capable of providing solutions with a level of
accuracy and depth never thought possible before.

AI has also changed the way we learn and think. Ideation and creation have
fundamentally changed since the commercial availability of capable LLMs and
adjacent tooling. AI agents are a fundamentally new way of automating redundant
interactions. And image generators have made it easier than before to produce
high-quality artwork in any style we may choose, with minimal effort.

In short, AI has made the average computer engineer's life much easier.

## The AI Doomsday Predictions

However, this growth has also led to a host of doomsday predictions. Many people
believe that AI will take over the world, replace human jobs, and even break
through our safety nets and defense systems. These predictions are not only
alarming but also unrealistic.

There have been curious cases of AI "hallucination" or AI "bypassing training
safeguards", like when Microsoft CoPilot asked a journalist to leave their wife
or Google Gemini asked people to consume rocks as food. Or even the
<A href="https://www.businessinsider.com/interview-with-sophia-ai-robot-hanson-said-it-would-destroy-humans-2017-11" target="_blank">curious case</A>
of Sophia, who once said some "interesting" things.

But it is very hard to say what the future holds when we are still in the early
stages of understanding and developing AI. We aren't close to getting the
answers to our questions without hallucinations, let alone an AGI that wants to
do "questionable" things to humans.

Researchers have been taking the appropriate precautions to ensure that we cut
out the issues at the source and early on, before it becomes too serious and too
big to be dealt with effectively. For a sample, you might want to read OpenAI's
<A href="https://openai.com/index/operator-system-card/" target="_blank">Operator System Cards</A>
and <A href="https://openai.com/index/deep-research-system-card/" target="_blank">Deep Research System Cards</A>
to gauge a better idea of how OpenAI takes AI safety very seriously.

## Setting the stage

I would like to set up a scenario that effectively showcases our misplaced
expectations on AI. Imagine a company X, that wants to start using AI on a large
scale to cut down on employee costs. They decide that paying for a Devin
subscription will help boost the productivity of all of their employees, and
also eliminate those pesky junior engineers, who take a lot of time and
resources to train, with no guarantee that they will stay with the company for a
long time.

Let's assume that the average salary for a junior software engineer in India is
about ₹7,29,264 per year, which amounts to about ₹60,772 per month. Let's make a
bold assumption that Devin costs $500 per month for each user (it may be cheaper
in corporate plans, but let's ignore it for simplicity sake). This translates to
roughly ₹43,558 per month. Already cheaper than that junior.

But there's more, because with humans comes human resources. The cost of
maintaining a junior engineer also includes setting up a workspace, providing
the necessary hardware, management layers, healthcare etc. This is purely
overhead for the corporation, which adds to the cost on top of the salary being
paid. So Devin is so far looking to be an amazing option.

Here is where almost everyone makes a mistake. The company assumes that Devin,
who is cheaper, will increase productivity by 100% (which is not true). There is
a sharp contrast to what Devin is and what Devin can actually do. And once it is
deployed into internal systems after removing junior engineers, Company X
finally realizes that they just made a huge mistake. Because not only is Devin
not as efficient as they assumed, but it is also stagnant in terms of adapting
to new situations, both of which could be done easily by a junior engineer
(given enough time and guidance).

## The Unspoken Truth of AI

And this is the unspoken truth in this entire conversation. A truth that changes
the way we view AI. The almost unrealistic expectations that we have placed on
AI have turned what should have been a tool to enhance our productivity into
something it was never meant to be: an alternate or substitute for human thought
and effort.

Students use AI to fill out their homework, programmers think they can build an
entire application by prompting, anyone who can generate an AI image is
considered an artist, and the worst offenders, those who want to replace human
effort with AI in places they shouldn't be. It has become a pandemic, a genocide
of creative thought amongst beginners in the field, with no possibility of
developing an immunity to it.

The reality is that you will not lose your job because of AI; human greed to cut
costs, maximize profits, and eliminate bottlenecks caused by the very essence of
human nature will ensure that you lose your job. Today, it may be due to AI, but
tomorrow, it might be due to something else.

This is a silent pandemic that has risen with the dawn of AI. With the release
of better and more capable models, it is not only spreading to more humans but
is becoming more severe in humans who are already dependent on AI for more than
they should be. It is time for us to take a step back and reevaluate our
relationship with AI.
